This video is brought to you by Skillshare an online learning community for
creators, with thousands of classes in design business,
and more Skillshare is giving away two free months of premium membership to help
you explore your creativity.
If you click the link in the description below that's for the first 500 people,
only more on them in a bit
In February, 1865,
an Augustinian frost stood up before a small crowd in the Moravian city of
Breno and delivered a lecture that changed the course of history for the last
eight years, Greg or Mendel had been cultivating peas in at his garden.
Each plant had been carefully selected for its characteristics like tall or
short or yellow or green,
and then painstakingly crossbred to create generations of
hybrids. There was always not just a shed load of peas, but a whole new science.
It was from Mendel's notes that the entire concept of genetic sprang,
a branch of biology that would fundamentally change our understanding of the
world. But here's the kicker.
No one would realize what a breakthrough Mendel had made for another 35 years.
At the time he delivered his lecture,
Greg or Mendel was middle aged anonymous and virtually unknown outside of
BRINO in his lifetime, it traveled little experienced less,
and mostly just lived in his a yet.
Somehow this nobody single handedly made one of the greatest
discoveries in history today on biographics.
We are delving into the life and the minds of Greg or Mendel and
discovering how this one monk formed our world
Of all the branches of science.
Genetics may be unique in that it can be traced back to a single person,
but if your vision of a man, so brain,
he can uncover whole new sciences is some wild head.
Rick star genius,
lording it over the simpletons around him repair to be disappointed.
Greg will Menzel. Wasn't just a modest man. He came from a background so modest.
He nearly didn't study signs at all.
Born Johan Mendel on the 22nd of July,
1822 young Mendel was the son of farming.
Parents seeking out a living in the Salus in modern day Czech Republic.
At that time, this was still a part of the Austrian empire.
One of the great powers of Europe and Mendel grew up speaking German,
but since nearly every location in our story has long since lost its German
name.
We're just gonna use the modern CZE names when referring to places that way,
if you wanna look stuff up later, you'll actually be able to find it.
And also I'll do a whole lot better job pronouncing it menthol and his parents
life in remote Silesia wasn't exactly easy.
The family was always teetering on the edge of financial catastrophe and
ma and par Harbor.
No great dreams for their son beyond having him grow up and help run the farm
that may very well have been Mendel's fate had it not been for
one man when Mendel was aged 11,
the village priest who also doubled as the local school master came to the
family farm asking for a meeting there. He told Mr. And Mrs.
Mendel that their son was exceptionally bright indeed alarmingly. So in fact,
the school master said Mendel was so clever that he should be allowed to
continue his education. Now,
this wouldn't exactly have been music to the families ears in the Austrian
empire, sending a child off secondary education,
often involved paying fees that most families simply couldn't manage.
Bob Mendel's parents weren't dirt poor.
They also couldn't afford to spend crazy money on something as nebulous as
learning, but the school master insisted and eventually the family caved.
And so it was that in 1834,
Mendel left his village for the first time and went to study in a Parva for the
gifted country boy, life in industrial,
a Parva wasn't exactly what you'd call enjoyable in a real city.
For the first time,
mental failed to fit in or adapt to the pressures that he felt to succeed.
He frequently fell ill plunging into deep dark depressions.
That would keep him from studying days.
It was the first flicker of the disease that would come to haunt Mendel for his
entire life. But those black days were still in the future.
Despite the strain at school Mendel graduated in 1840,
having excelled in his studies. In fact,
he did so well that his parents allowed him to continue to university in Almas,
a small, beautiful city.
I meant the rolling Hills of Moravia Almas in is less than 70 kilometers from
a par, but must have felt like a weld away gone was the industrial
try of Silesia replaced by clear air and Barack majesty,
but even such Instagram ready surroundings.
Couldn't stave off Mendel's black thoughts while at all Mars Mendel's mental
health that came close to total collapse twice.
He had depressive episode so deep that he dropped out of his mouth studies sling
back to his disappointed parents both times though he eventually recovered
enough to return to Almas, but even then money worries left him badly.
Overworked,
forced to tutor alongside his studies just to make enough money to eat. But he,
he made it through in 1843, Mendo graduated.
His parents must have breathed sigh relief. Finally, their son was coming home,
but home was the last thing on Mendel's mind depressed as had been in Almar sea
still wanted to study.
He just needed a way to do so without any financial pressure suffocating him.
Luckily in the Austrian empire of the mid 19th century, such a way existed.
One of the strangest things about Mendel's life story is just how much of it was
made possible by other people at every important moment,
there was someone there to push in in the right direction.
Someone like the village school,
master someone to like Abbot Franek NA and
Augustinian NA deeply believed in the creed dictum per sym at
Sapian,
which means from to wisdom as head of the ABB and the great
industrial city of Breo. Some 60 kilometers from Alemar sit,
devoted his life to building a center for study.
He supported his monks in scientific endeavors,
helps them get university placements without paying Feest for Mendel.
This was exactly what he needed in 1843. He joins the order,
taking the name Gregor for the rest of his life.
Mendel would be based in naps AIE and Bruno. And speaking of Bruno it's time,
we got to know the place that Mendel called home. The Czech Republic.
Second city Bruno today has a reputation for being pleasantly boring,
the sort of place. Well,
life is a steady procession of Sunday afternoons back in the mid 19th century,
though, it was an industrial powerhouse,
a multicultural center where vast German check and Jewish communities rubbed
shoulders from this melting point would spring mines such as earnest mark and
Kurt Gole or musical talents such as leash Y check someone else whose
talent was spotted by Abbot Napa, by the way, in short,
this was the exact right place, that the exact right time,
if he wanted to change the world, not the Mendel of any inkling of his destiny,
just yet. In fact, his first years at the Abbey seemed almost to be a mistake.
Part of Mendel's duties after being ordained was to visit the sick and dying of
Brio to for them comfort. But country, boy Mendel found the booming city.
So overwhelming and the lives of the poor there.
So sad and squalled that he started to crack apart in 1849,
he had another breakdown.
This one plunging him so deep into the black ocean at the bottom of his mind
that it took nearly a year for him to recover.
Thankfully ABAP was super enlightened where mental health was concerned.
He gave men space to recover and then quietly assigned him to a much less taxing
job teaching and the much less forensic nearby town of Sonomo for Menzel.
This seems like the perfect combination. He didn't just recover.
Inno Mo he flourished sadly though. It wasn't meant to. In 1850,
the Austrian empire suddenly shook up its education system.
Teachers could no longer teach just because they were clever and needed work.
They now needed a qualification to set foot in a classroom.
And you could probably guess what happened next.
The strain of the exam caused Mendel's nerves to come back,
leaving him unable to continue teaching. At this point,
it must have looked like the young man was destined for nothing more than a life
of battling his illness with only the occasional Ray of sunshine,
breaking in to keep him going. But Abbo inhab thought differently.
The following year, 1851,
he encouraged Mendel to enroll at the university of Vienna,
which was just opening brand new courses on science.
It seems the Abbot hope to give Mendel something, to focus on,
to distract him from his problems. Instead,
he wounds up handing Mendel the keys to his future.
Now you might not be heading off to Vienna to you science,
but there is no reason you shouldn't improve your skills and keep learning
whatever stage you're at in your career or your life.
And that's where today's sponsor. Skillshare comes into the picture. Now,
unlike some websites where you have to pay for individual classes with a premium
membership from Skillshare,
you essentially get unlimited access all of their classes.
So you can take as many as you want, whatever you wanna learn,
go check out skills, share. You'll be able to do it on there.
I'm someone who will just jump into a particular part of a class.
They'll be like, I wanna learn that specific thing on that specific topic. Now,
if I didn't have unlimited access to all of the classes,
I'd have to pay you for that whole class just so I can watch the one,
but that I wanna watch. That's not how it works with skill.
You just pay a fixed fee per month, unlimited access.
It's all like the buffet of online classes.
Now I've talked about some classes I've taken before and I'd still recommend
those. I took a class on email productivity from Alexandra, Samuel,
and I took another course on just building good habits with Thomas Frank.
And those are both solid, definitely worth checking out. Anyway,
join more than 7 million creators learning with Skillshare skills shares giving
away two months of premium help you explore your creativity.
If you just click the link in the description,
parks below that's for the first 500 people only, but after that,
it's still super affordable at only around $10 a month. So check that out.
There is a link below and let's get back to the video.
If Greg or Menzel thought a Parva and Bruno were big.
We can't imagine how he must have felt when he first saw Vienna the capital of
an empire that stretched all the way from the Alps to the car pay Athens 19th
century Vienna was one of Europe's greatest cities under the new emperor
friends, Joseph,
it would soon grow to become a cultural and artistic powerhouse,
but if Mendel found the sprawling multiethnic city overwhelming,
he never showed it. His two years studying in the capital,
passed calmly without a hints of the mental stress that had accompanied such
moves before.
Maybe the difference this time was that Mendel was able to get fully involved in
his courses rather than worrying about how to make money in order to pay for
them and what courses they were Mendel studied experimental physics under C
Doppler of Doppler effect fame and practical biology under Fran Z.
Although forgotten today,
UNGA was a leading light of Austrian biology in the 1850s.
And his closest equivalent is rich Dawkins.
UNGA was a huge proponent of the pre Darwinian evolutionary theory of
hybridization, which rejected church doctrine in favor of a natural,
if incorrect theory of how animals evolved naturally,
this made him a huge hate figure among the devout and UNGA spends the entire
period.
He tutored Mendel fighting off attacks in the popular press yet for all of the
flack that UNGA caught from the hardcore religious,
he doesn't seem to have repulsed the monk Mendel at all. In fact,
he appears to have inspired him the year after he graduated and returns of Bruno
1854 Mendel approached Abbot nap with a plan.
He wanted to run a hybridization experiment in the,
a likely the biggest the world had ever seen at the time.
That was a huge disconnect between what was the about hybrids and what
practical experience told you the orthodoxy was that an animal was
an animal and it didn't change no matter what.
So if you had say a Labrador and a poodle,
they might produce one hybrid offspring,
but future generations would revert back to being separate species,
but that didn't tally with the lived experience of animal breeders,
who were like, well, dude, look at all these Labradoodles,
where do you think they come from?
What was needed was someone with time and patience and mathematical training to
investigate this problem across thousands of specimens and multiple generations
in order to figure out exactly what was, is going on.
Someone like Greg or Mendel initially Mendel wanted to run his gigantic
experiments on mice,
but perhaps realizing that experimental genetic research and things with teeth
sounds like the setup for a terrible horror movie Abbo app
refused, which is how Mendel came to settle on these thing.
We know for peas starting in 1856,
Greg or Mendel spent eight years breeding,
different types of peas and meticulously recording the results by one county
bread and analyzed over 30,000 separate plants.
If that sounds like an extremely boring way to spend the best part of a decade,
well, no arguments there,
but the effect it would have would be anything but dull. In a short time,
this one monk working in his garden was going to overhaul everything.
The biologists thought they knew.
If you're wondering now why nobody had bothered to do this research before,
why you all the only one Mendel and self seemed flabbergasted by the lack of
scientific interest writing that no one has concentrated on the number of
different forms that appear among the offspring of hybrids.
No one has arranged these forms into their separate generations.
No one has counted them, but there may have been a good reason for that.
The work Mendel undertook was almost painfully tedious.
The first stage was ment to select varieties of peace to cultivate it wound up
choosing seven types with binary characteristics that were easy to detect,
for example, tall or short, yellow or green. And so on.
This was important because people looking into hybrids,
pre Mendel had been all like, well, okay, these are all way different.
Let's cross breed them and kind of just see what happens.
But Mendel scientific training made him more rigorous.
He only wanted to cross breed those with opposing characteristics,
at least at first.
So that meant making sure the tall plants spread with the short ones that the
yellow ones BR with the green ones, it must have been insanely fiddly work,
the sort of work that would make most people question their choices in life.
Yet Mendel kept it up.
He kept it up across eight whole years across uncountable
generations of P hybrids. And slowly patterns began to,
we merge let's take flower color. As an example,
one of the varieties Mendel worked with was pee plants that flowered either
white or purple Mendel noticed that when he cross bred them,
the next generation of plants all had purple flowers.
It was almost like the whites that never existed,
but when Mendel took those hybrids and kept right on,
breeding them something interesting happened in the subsequent generation,
white flowers, reappeared, not many,
but roughly around 25% of the new generation of hybrids.
It was from this observation that Mendel's greatest work was born.
We don't want to get too far into the weeds with this where a history channel,
not a science channel,
but we'll give you the bare bones version of Mendel's conclusions.
The first was that certain traits, uh,
what he called dominance like the purple flowers. In our example,
while others are recessive, like the white flowers,
these traits were passed down at random from parent to child.
The second was that these traits were all passed down independently of other
traits. So just because a eFlow trait was passed down,
didn't mean that a tall plant trait necessarily came with it or whatever
Mendel's third and final insight was that you could graft a basic statistical
framework onto this to predict what traits might show up across the population.
It was from these key conclusions that the entire idea of genetics would
eventually be born. Not that Mendo realized this,
although he theorized his findings could be applied to any living thing.
He seems to have repeatedly missed the implications in 1862. For example,
he read Charles Darwin's on the origin of species without ever twigging that
their work could be combined to explain. So,
so much about existence yet Menzel wasn't so unworldly that he just
kept his findings for the ay. He still wanted to tell people about his work.
It's just a shame that when the time came, no one was listening
In 1861.
Gregor Menzel had co-founded the natural science society in Bruno conceived as a
place to discuss new ideas,
as well as an outlet for any work it's like-minded members did,
the society soon became a key part of Bruno's intellectual life.
It also gave Mendel a useful place for revealing his breakthrough.
That revelation came on February the eighth, 1865, that cold evening,
the society converged on a building in central Bruno there as the freezing
members huddled around the stove Mendel gave the first of two presentations on
its findings. The title was experiments in plant hybrids,
and it ran who a mere 47 pages written down.
It wasn't designed to be ostentatious, but it was revolutionary.
It seems those attending knew at two Mendel's two lectures became the talk of
Bruno's scientific circles yet for some strange reason words never spread beyond
the Moravian cap. It wasn't for a lack of trying the society published.
Mendel's like as a book in 1866 and sent reprints to libraries
across the empire,
they even sent a translated version to Charles Darwin in England.
But Darwin simply did is what everybody did with Mendel's book.
He just put it to one side and forgot all about it. The trouble was,
it just appeared so boring. I mean, great of book on breeding peas.
Thanks <laugh> even those that did read Mendel's work often came away thinking
it was applicable only to the vegetable garden. So it was interesting.
If you were a horticulturalist,
it did help that Menor refused to promote his own work,
seemingly resigning himself to not being understood.
He told a colleague in 1866,
I knew that the results I obtained were not easily compatible with our
contemporary scientific knowledge,
but perhaps the biggest reason Mendel's work fell into obscurity was loss.
In summer 1867,
Abbot Erna passed away aged 74. It was a real blow,
not just to the AB itself,
but to Briner hole with one of the great intellectual lights of the city gone.
The far looked desperately for a replacement.
Someone who could take over from NA,
they found their man in Greg or Mendel in 1868,
Mendel became Abbots of naps old a it was a great promotion.
The sort of life,
the poor farm boy from Silesia could never have dreamed of leading as a younger
man.
Unfortunately it was also a life cramed with responsibilities with no free time
left mental abandoned, his scientific pursuits.
His peas were forgotten his lectures discarded from his mind.
And that was it for the rest of his story.
It feels cruel to skip over a whole 16 years of a man life like
that.
But really there's nothing much for us to say from the moment he became Abbot
Mendel did nothing of note. He got older, his eyesight failed.
He contracted Bright's disease and lived in some pain.
And he spent the last years of his life fighting the Austria-Hungarian state
over new taxes, LEED on monasteries.
When he finally on January the sixth, 1884,
he was remembered not as a scientist, but as a familiar face around Bruno,
nothing more, nothing less.
If people had been taking bets on his name being remembered in over 130 years
time, you would've got fantastic arts.
Sometimes a long shot comes in. It would take decades more,
but Mendel would eventually become famous
Curiously.
The one person who seems to have been certain Mendel's name would live on was
Mendel himself before he died. He wrote to a friends,
my scientific studies have afforded me great gratification,
and I am convinced that it will not be long before the whole world acknowledges
the results of my work.
He soon turned out to be more right than even he could have guessed the
rediscovery of Mendel.
And the start of his influence on the world came about in 1900,
that year three separate scientists, all separately published work on hybrids.
That was suspiciously similar to mens. We say suspiciously because even today,
no, one's quite sure what happened. The official story is that Hugo dere,
Karl Eric CORs and Eric Che Markon says sag. All declared.
They'd made a breakthrough only to be astonished when proof was found that
Mendel had done the same decades earlier, however,
there's evidence each of these men may have read Mendel's book prior to their
research and may have independently decided it was exactly obscure enough to
steel without them being noticed, regardless of how it had happens, though,
their papers made the scientific community turned back to Mendel's work for the
first time in 34 years, and what they found blew their minds.
It was clear to people living in the 20th century that Mendel had hit on
something big. One of his new acolytes, William Bateson,
even coined a name for what Mendel had studied genetics in no time at all.
Mendel was all the rage while the serious scientific community turned its nose
up at the new science for several years.
More breakthroughs soon made the field respectable with that Mendel's legacy
was secured today. Greg or Mendel is remembered as the father of genetics.
The man from whose work everything in the discipline Springs,
incredible as Mendel's work is though. What's more incredible.
Maybe that it happened at all. Looking back across his life story,
you can see that Mendel was one of those people.
History seems destined into completely passed by his life was so sheltered.
So anonymous that even the biggest events of the day barely touched upon him.
I mean, this guy lived through the 8 48 revolutions.
We've done enough 19th century videos by now to know that anyone who lived
through 1848 had their lives changed by it, but not Mendel.
He simply kept on working at the Abbey,
tending to the gardens just as he did when pressure invaded Bruno in
1866,
just as he did when the Austrian empire trans formed into Austria Hungary a year
later,
it says something when a man can pass through history while leaving such little
mark on it,
and it makes you think who's to save is not another Greg or Menzel out there
right now,
utterly anonymous to all the members of one little society
in the minor city.
He lives in beavering away at research that will one day utterly
transform our lives.
The story of Greg or Mandel then is not just the story of one man
and his peas. It's the story of how ideas per cyst,
how great breakthroughs can survive.
Even when the minds behind them dies in obscurity,
Greg or Mendel is rightly famous today who the next Mendel might be and what
life changing research they may be doing. Well,
that's something we will have to wait and see.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do smash that light button below. Don't forget to subscribe.
Also check it off. Fantastic sponsor skills share.
They are linked to below and thank you for watching.